---
layout: post_teaching
title: Lecture 19
category: biostat216fall2023
---

## Today

- Concluding remarks. Three pillars of machine learning: analysis/probability/statistics, linear algebra/optimization, and computing/algorithms.

- Some applications.

- Multivariate calculus and optimization (cont'd).

- Course evaluation: <https://my.ucla.edu/>

## Announcement

- Send me you questions before the last lecture. I will try to answer them in the last lecture.

## Some issues I saw in HW6

- HW6 Q10. Recognize SVD.

- HW6 Q12. Explanations?

- HW6 Q13. Invariance of the spectral norm (L2), nuclear norm, and Frobenius norm under orthogonal rotation.

- HW6 Q17. Alternative proof of global optimality of $\hat{\Omega}$ using Cholesky decomposition (optional). Denote the Cholesky decomposions $\boldsymbol{\Omega} = \mathbf{L} \mathbf{L}'$ and $\frac{\sum_{i=1}^n (\mathbf{y}_i - \hat{\boldsymbol{\mu}})(\mathbf{y}_i - \hat{\boldsymbol{\mu}})'}{n} = \mathbf{M} \mathbf{M}'$. Let $\mathbf{Z} =  \mathbf{L}^{-1} \mathbf{M}$, then
\begin{eqnarray*}
    \ell(\boldsymbol{\Omega}) &=& - \frac n2 \log \det \mathbf{L} \mathbf{L}' - \frac n2 \text{tr}( \mathbf{L}^{'-1} \mathbf{L}^{-1} \mathbf{M} \mathbf{M}') - \frac{n}{2} \log 2\pi \\
    &=& n \log \det \mathbf{L}^{-1} \mathbf{M} - \frac n2 \|\mathbf{L}^{-1} \mathbf{M}\|_{\text{F}}^2 - n \log \det \mathbf{M} - \frac{n}{2} \log 2\pi \\
    &=& n \sum_i \log z_{ii} - \frac n2 \sum_i z_{ii}^2 - \frac n2 \sum_{i > j} z_{ij}^2 - n \log \det \mathbf{M} - \frac{n}{2} \log 2\pi.
\end{eqnarray*}
The maximum occurs with $z_{ii} = 1$ and $z_{ij} = 0$ for $i > j$.

## Q&A

- HW6 Q11.6 (MP inverse produces the smallest least squares solution). $\beta^\star = (\beta^\star - \beta^+) + \beta^+$, where $\beta^\star - \beta^+ \in \mathcal{N}(X'X) = \mathcal{N}(X)$ and $\beta^+ \in \mathcal{C}(X')$. Thus $\beta^\star - \beta^+ \perp \beta^+$ and $\|\beta^\star\|^2 = \|\beta^\star - \beta^+\|^2 + \|\beta^+\|^2 \ge \|\beta^+\|^2$.

- HW4, Q3.5 (Householder transformation for QR decomposition). 

- HW4 BV 12.2. 

- Direct sum of vector spaces. 
